docs: add a post about release-related changes (#3653)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2022-02-22-towards-better-releases.md

---
author: Vadim Chelyshov
title: Towards better releases
authorURL: https://twitter.com/_dos65
authorImageURL: https://github.com/dos65.png
---

As many of you might have noticed, the previous `0.11.0` release didn't go smoothly due to a number of issues that came to light only after the release was published.
Some of them were quite critical and the only option to continue to work was to downgrade Metals until `0.11.1` arrived.

We apologize for that!

However, this post is not only about saying sorry.
The reasons why it's happened weren't a complete surprise for us.
In order to avoid such situations in the future we have taken upon us to take steps that will allow us to detect issues early.

> Some of these issues were quite obvious and we were aware of them for a while.

Reviewer: I would remove `The reasons why it's happened weren't a complete surprise for us.` and instead replace it with `Some of these issues were quite obvious and we were aware of them for a while.`. Or maybe it's better to emphasize that we are aware of them now instead of the past? `We were aware that our release process wasn't perfect but the infamous 0.11.1 release exploited all pitfalls of it`

There were two main improvements that were implemented since the last release:

> - Backpublish Scala versions support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Decouple Metals releases from Scala releases
```
won't it be easier for the reader to understand what was done?

- Pre-release version for VSCode extension

## Backpublish Scala versions support

We haven't mentioned this in the release notes for `0.11.0`, but from that version we have changed the way Metals detect whether a specific version is supported and thanks to that we are now able to backpublish new Scala versions support.
The support of Scala `3.1.1` Scala was added to Metals `0.11.1` using this new mechanic.
It allows us to provide new Scala versions support much faster than before and also support Scala3-NIGTHTLY versions.

The additional benefit from this approach is that it eliminates time pressure from future Metals releases.
If you look at release notes for previous versions, almost every one brings at least one new compiler version support.

> Having this limitation and the need to provide the new release as soon as possible it always was increasing the chances to affect the quality of release. So, now with this new feature we are able to take our time for final fixes and do release with more confidence.

Reviewer: I would move this part to the beginning, this will allow creating previously/currently structure of the paragraph. Also I would mention a bit more about why Metals need compiler-specific things. Sth like that:

In order to provide (features?/completions? - I can't recall the proper word) Metals use Scala version-specific compiler API, that's why previously we had to release Metals for each new Scala version.

Then there will be a nice flow: how it was working, why it was a problem and what is the solution.

Author: To cover these both changes I come with the following structure:
```
- Beginning - introduce a problem and quickly mention that next parts are covering each solution that was implemented
- More detailed text per every feature
```

If I move this part to then last two paragraphs won't make sense.

  That works for Scala3-NIGHTLY versions too. Metals has a scheduled daily job that publishes artifacts for newly discovered NIGHTLY versions.

## Pre-release version for VSCode extension

Another great feature that was added was the possibility to use the `pre-release` versions of Metals extension.
If you open Metals extension page, you will find `Switch to Pre-release version` button.
This version is like a snapshot, it's published per every change in [scalameta/metals-vscode](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-vscode) repository.

It allows to test not yet released features, as well as to check if everything works fine for your workspace using the latest main branch. 
Some issues might be observed only under the particular version of the client as was the case with the ill fated 0.11.0 release.

Also, there is a new setting `Metals: Suggest Latest Upgrade` that is enabled by default for `pre-release`.
If you have it enabled, you will receive notifications with an option to upgrade Metals-server version to the latest snapshot once a day.

We hope that some brave users will start using this `pre-release` version and report issues if there will be any.

> This will help us spot problems earlier.

Reviewer: I would add `Using pre-release versions may result in a less stable experience and it is not intended for beginners.` somewhere. Pre-release is great but I think we didn't warn users enough about potential issues.

Author: Added into `Notice`

---
author: Vadim Chelyshov
title: Towards better releases
authorURL: https://twitter.com/_dos65
authorImageURL: https://github.com/dos65.png
---

As many of you might have noticed, the previous `0.11.0` release didn't go smoothly due to a number of issues that came to light only after the release was published.
Some of them were quite critical and the only option to continue to work was to downgrade Metals until `0.11.1` arrived.

We apologize for that!

However, this post is not only about saying sorry.

> The reasons why it's happened weren't a complete surprise for us.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reasons why it happened weren't a complete surprise for us.
```

> In order to avoid such situations in the future we have taken upon us to take steps that will allow us to detect issues early.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to avoid such situations in the future we have taken it upon ourselves to take steps that will allow us to detect issues earlier.
```

Some of these issues were quite obvious and we were aware of them for a while.

There were two main improvements that were implemented since the last release:
- Backpublish Scala versions support
- Pre-release version for VSCode extension

## Backpublish Scala versions support

> We haven't mentioned this in the release notes for `0.11.0`, but from that version we have changed the way Metals detect whether a specific version is supported and thanks to that we are now able to backpublish new Scala versions support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We haven't mentioned this in the release notes for `0.11.0`, but since that version we have changed the way Metals detects whether a specific version is supported and thanks to that we are now able to backpublish new Scala versions support.
```

> The support of Scala `3.1.1` Scala was added to Metals `0.11.1` using this new mechanic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The support of Scala `3.1.1` Scala was added to Metals `0.11.1` using this new mechanism.
```

> It allows us to provide new Scala versions support much faster than before and also support Scala3-NIGTHTLY versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It allows us to provide new Scala version support much faster than before and also support Scala3-NIGTHTLY versions.
```

> The additional benefit from this approach is that it eliminates time pressure from future Metals releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The additional benefit from this approach is that it eliminates time pressure for future Metals releases.
```

> If you look at release notes for previous versions, almost every one brings at least one new compiler version support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you look at the release notes for previous versions, almost every one brings at least one new compiler version support.
```

> Having this limitation and the need to provide the new release as soon as possible it always was increasing the chances to affect the quality of release. So, now with this new feature we are able to take our time for final fixes and do release with more confidence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Having this limitation and the need to provide the new release as soon as possible always increases the chances of something affecting the release. So, now with this new feature we are able to take our time for final fixes and do releases with more confidence.
```

The current state for Scala versions support is:
- Every Metals release comes with support to all known supported Scala versions + last 5 latest Scala3-NIGHTLY versions.

>   This is applied for SNAPSHOT releases too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This is applied to SNAPSHOT releases too.
```

> - In case new Scala version appear, the latest Metals release will receive its support automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In case a new Scala version appear, the latest Metals release will receive its support automatically.
```

  For example, the next Scala `3.1.2`  will be supported only by the latest Metals `0.11.1` but not by `0.11.0`.
  That works for Scala3-NIGHTLY versions too. Metals has a scheduled daily job that publishes artifacts for newly discovered NIGHTLY versions.

## Pre-release version for VSCode extension

> Another great feature that was added was the possibility to use the `pre-release` versions of Metals extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another great feature that was added was the possibility to use the `pre-release` versions of the Metals extension.
```

> If you open Metals extension page, you will find `Switch to Pre-release version` button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you open the Metals extension page, you will find a `Switch to Pre-release version` button.
```

> This version is like a snapshot, it's published per every change in [scalameta/metals-vscode](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-vscode) repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This version is like a snapshot, it's published for every change in the [scalameta/metals-vscode](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-vscode) repository.
```

---
author: Vadim Chelyshov
title: Towards better releases
authorURL: https://twitter.com/_dos65
authorImageURL: https://github.com/dos65.png
---

Hi, Metals folks!

You may have noticed that the previous `0.11.0` release didn't go smoothly.
Unfortunately, a group of issues was found only after the release was published.
Some of them were quite critical. The only option to continue to work was to downgrade Metals until `0.11.1` arrived.

We apologize for that!

However, this post is not only about saying sorry.
The reasons why it's happened weren't a complete surprise for us.

> At the release moment, we were aware of the weaknesses that we had, and they struck us badly.

Reviewer 3: Instead of this would do:
```
In order to remedy it and to avoid such situations in the future we have taken upon us to take steps that will allow us to detect issues early. Some of these issues were quite obvious and we were aware of them for a while.
```

Author: replaced with suggested but without `to remedy it` part.

> We are glad to say that there is couple of things that were done to improve Metals release process.
> We hope that with them and your help the chances of repeating the same situation will be minimized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I don't think the sentence is neccessary if we add the above.

Author: I wanted to somehow emphasize in the header that people can help with testing

Reviewer 3: I would just write it explicitely then.

Author: ok, just removed it.

> Here they are with a bit of explanation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There were two main improvements that were implemented since the last release:
```

- The ability to add support for newer Scala versions to the current Metals release
- Pre-release version for VSCode extension

> ## The ability to add support for newer Scala versions to the current Metals release 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Backpublish Scala versions support
```

Author: cool! there is term for it

> This change wasn't noticed in release notes to `0.11.0` but it was already battle-tested.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We haven't mentioned this in the release notes for `0.11.0`, but from that version we have changed the way Metals detect whether a specific version is supported and thanks to that we are now able to backpublish new Scala versions support.
```

The support of Scala `3.1.1` Scala was added to Metals `0.11.1` using this new mechanic.

> It allows us to provide new Scala versions support much faster than before and support Scala3-NIGTHTLY versions too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It allows us to provide new Scala versions support much faster than before and aslo support Scala3-NIGTHTLY versions.
```

Author: applied

> The additional bonus point from this approach is that it eliminates time pressure from future Metals releases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The additional benefit from this approach is that it eliminates time pressure from future Metals releases.
```

If you look at release notes for previous versions, almost every one brings at least one new compiler version support.
Having this limitation and the need to provide the new release as soon as possible it always was increasing the chances to affect the quality of release. So, now with this new feature we are able to take our time for final fixes and do release with more confidence.

The current state for Scala versions support is:
- Every Metals release comes with support to all known supported Scala versions + last 5 latest Scala3-NIGHTLY versions.
  This is applied for SNAPSHOT releases too.
- In case new Scala version appear, the latest Metals release will receive its support automatically.
  For example, the next Scala `3.1.2`  will be supported only by the latest Metals `0.11.1` but not by `0.11.0`.
  That works for Scala3-NIGHTLY versions too. Metals has a scheduled daily job that publishes artifacts for newly discovered NIGHTLY versions.

## Pre-release version for VSCode extension

> Now, it's possible to use the `pre-release` version of Metals extension.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another great feature that was added was the possibility to use the `pre-release` versions of Metals extension.
```

If you open Metals extension page, you will find `Switch to Pre-release version` button.
This version is like a snapshot, it's published per every change in [scalameta/metals-vscode](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-vscode) repository.

> It allows to test not released yet features, as well as to check if everything works fine on the client-side. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It allows to test not yet released features, as well as to check if everything works fine for your workspace using the latest main branch. 
```

> Like it was in `0.11.0`, some issues might be observed only under the particular version of the client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some issues might be observed only under the particular version of the client as was the case with the ill fated 0.11.0 release.
```

Also, there is a new setting `Metals: Suggest Latest Upgrade` that is enabled by default for `pre-release`.

> Having it enabled, you will be receiving notifications with an option to upgrade Metals-server version to the latest snapshot once a day.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have it enabled, you will receive notifications with an option to upgrade Metals-server version to the latest snapshot once a day.
```
